Blog: Quarkus 2.x platform and Quarkiverse support in the dev tools (#1039)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2021-07-30-quarkus-2x-platform-quarkiverse-registry.adoc

---
layout: post
title: 'Platforms and Streams: a new way to discover Quarkus extensions'
date: 2021-07-30
tags: release
synopsis: 'The platform model and supporting tools available in Quarkus 2.1.0.Final make it easy to discover and work with the Quarkus extension ecosystem.'
author: aloubyansky
---
= Platforms and Streams: a new way to discover Quarkus extensions

As you may have seen from recent Quarkus Insights episodes (#48, #55 and #57, specifically), we've made a number of changes to our tools in the 2.x stream to improve the developer experience.  When 2.0 was released, a few sharp-eyed Quarkus client users spotted some new options and we're excited to explain what those are all about with the release of Quarkus 2.1.

> **TL;DR:** We have a whole new set of more granular BOMs that you can use instead of the big `quarkus-universe-bom`. We have deployed a registry service that aligns and manages platform compatibility across these more granular BOMs and our tools (maven, gradle and client) know how to work with this registry to simplify the discovery of extensions that work with your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**TL;DR:** We have a whole new set of more granular BOMs that you can use instead of the big `quarkus-universe-bom`. We have deployed a registry service that aligns and manages platform compatibility across these more granular BOMs and our tools (maven, gradle and CLI) know how to work with this registry to simplify the discovery of extensions that work with your project.
```

> As of the 2.1.0.Final release, the Quarkus client uses this registry by default to resolve the Quarkus platform used by your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of the 2.1.0.Final release, the Quarkus CLI uses this registry to resolve the Quarkus platform used by your project.
```

[source, bash]
----
# The client will create a project with the latest/recommended quarkus release
$ quarkus create
# You can use the --stream parameter to narrow to a specific release 
$ quarkus create -S 2.0
$ quarkus create -S 2.1
----

== The Evolution of the Platform Model

The Quarkus 1.x platform was based on a single BOM - `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom`, that would be imported by Quarkus applications. The universe BOM would include all the Quarkus
platform extensions plus their dependencies. BOMs are meant to make it easy to align common dependencies on versions that work for all the libraries and frameworks used in an application.
However, badly composed BOMs may actually make it very difficult or practically impossible to achieve that. Generally speaking, the wider the scope of the dependencies a BOM manages,

> the higher the risk for its users of running into incompatiblity issues including libraries that aren't managed by the BOM into their applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the higher the risk of running into incompatiblity issues when users include libraries that aren't managed by the BOM into their applications.
```

The `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom`, as its artifactId implies, is certainly a large and diverse BOM, including dependencies of Camel, Google Cloud Services, Kogito, OptaPlanner

> and other Quarkus platform members. Importing `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom` will enforce ~3600 dependency version constraints on an application. Besides the fact that it's practically

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and other Quarkus platform members. Importing `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom` will enforce ~3600 dependency version constraints on an application. 

Besides the fact that it's practically
```

always way more than necessary, it may actually cause a serious compatibility issue that could have been avoided if the Quarkus platform BOM was not trying to manage the "universe".

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> E.g. including a library that depends on a different version of the `commons-beanutils:commons-beanutils` than Camel Quarkus into an application that actually does not include any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, including a library that depends on a different version of the `commons-beanutils:commons-beanutils` than Camel Quarkus into an application that actually does not include any
```

Camel Quarkus extension may become problematic, because the `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom` will enforce the version required by Camel Quarkus.

As of Quarkus 2.0.0.Final, in addition to the monolithic `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom`, we also define a number of platform-member-specific BOMs, e.g.

* `io.quarkus.platform:quarkus-bom:2.1.0.Final` - an equivalent of the `io.quarkus:quarkus-bom`;
* `io.quarkus.platform:quarkus-camel-bom:2.1.0.Final` - manages only the Camel Quarkus-related extensions and their required dependencies;
* `io.quarkus.platform:quarkus-kogito-bom:2.1.0.Final` - manages only the Kogito Quarkus-related extensions and their required dependencies;
* etc

Now applications need to import only the relevant BOMs, which avoids enforcing dependency constraints from the rest of the "universe".

> NOTE: Given that every member-specific BOM is actually a fragment of the `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom`, member BOMs can be imported in any order w/o creating a conflict.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TIP: Given that every member-specific BOM is actually a fragment of the `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom`, member BOMs can be imported in any order w/o creating a conflict.
```
